# Empathy the most essential non-technical skill that each developer should have

###Empathy

1.

What Is Empathy? Empathy is understanding and being sensitive to the experiences of others without those experiences being explicitly communicated to you.

To build a great product, as developers we must put ourselfs in the shoes of other people. By other people I don't mean only user. Seeing things from your manager or collage perspective will help us understand what they are thinking and feeling.  
That’s important because we can make better decisions as a developers.

Software development always involves human connections. We make great products for and with other people. If we put empathy at the center of technology, we can solve problems more efficient by getting to the heart of what’s important to people, both users and fellow developers. It helps us to create better products and working enviroment because we can understand the people who will be using them or work wih us.

By using empthy we can easily answer questions like: How people will be using final product? What features will be helpful for them? How this product can help them to improve their lives? It helps to gather information for requirements of the project. 
We can see more clearly who will be interacting with our software and we can check if it is accesible for the most range of audience.

2. 


Empathy is a required ingredient for successful software. Software is an expression of an idea. Coding is building that idea into a tool that others will use to achieve a goal. By having empathy for someone else, or even your future self, you’re able to build a more effective tool.

With empathy, you're on the fast track to understanding the people that will use your software. Other developers may choose to take a logical approach to fleshing out requirements. But by using empathy as your secret weapon, you’ll have a clear way to stay focused on the most important people – your end users.

3.

Questions about your team members
Why are they making their decisions? What can I do to help them?

Empathy is helpful for being a great team member or a mentor.Having empathy for other programmers, especially ones that are learning new things. Remind yourself of something that was really hard for you to learn and how that felt. They probably feel similarly. Being rude to them, diminishing their progress, or being pedantic will only be harmful and make that process harder for them.

Software developers should use empathy when building software with other people because you’ll be more likely to predict the reactions of your teammates. Empathy is a big part of working in teams.

Code is another form of communication. When architecting and developing a system, we should strive to share an understanding with the people who will interact with our code. Empathy can help us put ourselves in those people's shoes.

In addition, with empathy, you’re more likely to build maintainable code. Other developers may not think about the advantage that empathy gives them. They’re quick to sacrifice maintainability for speed. They don’t think about other developers or their future self at the component level of the system. By using empathy as your secret weapon, you’ll write cleaner code with proper documentation.

Empathy helps us work with and understand our teammates at a deeper level. Empathy allows a developer to comprehend what it’s like for someone else to clean up their mess, and in turn makes them want to cause fewer messes for others. It helps the developer take responsibility for their own work.

By using empathy as your secret weapon, you’ll be able to break down silos and help support others better, thus becoming a more valuable team member.


Software developers should use empathy when they’re leading. Leadership is relevant to all of us, because we’re always influencing others, even when we’re not trying to.

Empathy in software development leadership is a balance between freedom and accountability. You'll be more effective at convincing others of your point of view, but at the same time, you’ll be more likely to see both sides of a technical debate.

This ability to see things from others’ perspectives is a key skill when taking the lead.

Some developers are happy to go it alone, only focusing on their own needs. But by using empathy as your secret weapon, you’ll be able to relate to the needs of your co-workers and give them the leadership they need to be a great team.


